# Introduction

The question ‘Is it a big number?’ is often raised on the BBC radio programme _More or Less_ when probing eye-catching statistics. A figure of several million pounds may initially seem large, but may represent a small proportion of total government spending. Awareness of a denominator value can influence judgement of a number’s magnitude. In data visualisation, this contextual information can be displayed by extending an axis to accomodate the denominator value. However, this option is typically omitted from visualisations, since axis settings are typically based on plotted data by default. In this study, we investigate how these design settings affect interpretations of how large or small plotted values are.

#### Overview

Across two experiments, we investigate the interpretation of magnitudes in bar charts. We plotted ficticious datasets which contained multiple observations of a subset, all with the same denominator values. In the first experiment, we displayed charts with axes which either terminated just above plotted values, or terminated at the denominator value, which was specified in accompanying text. Participants rated values’ magnitudes as higher when default axes were used, compared to extended axes. In the second experiment, we manipulated the axis range, as before, and also the presence of the denominator information in text. The difference in magnitude ratings between the two axis settings was greater when denominator information not supplied. This indicate that this information mitigates the biasing effect of visual appearance.

# Related Work

A wealth of research demonstrates biases in the interpretation of numbers. A disease’s survival rate elicits different judgements compared to its corresponding mortality rate (Tversky & Kahneman, 1981), the fat content of meat elicits different judgements compared to its corresponding lean content (Levin, 1987). The units used to express the same values (e.g., months vs. years) affect comparisons (Burson, Monga and Bagchi) and also interpretations of precision and accuracy (Zhang and Schwarz). 

Various biases in magnitude judgements reveal the importance of accounting for numerical context. Base rate neglect describes difficulty acknowledging population-level characteristics when making judgements about a sample (Cosmides and Tooby). Format neglect describes a bias against incorporating set size information when judging percentage formats (top 20%) and numerical formats (top 10, Sevilla et al., 2018). Denominator neglect occurs in judgements which overweight numerator information at the expense of denominator information (Reyna and Brainerd, 2008). The latter also leads (in part) to large percentages of a small number appearing greater than the *numerically equivalent* smaller percentages of a larger number (Li and Chapman, 2013). The general mechanism responsible for these biases is a failure to properly acknowledge numerical context.

Visualisations can help combat biases. Denominator information becomes visually available when icon arrays present both focal outcomes (e.g., number deceased) *and also* alternative outcomes (e.g., number survived). Research suggests that the combined array acts as a visual cue to the denominator, facilitating reasoning. For example, including alternative outcomes in an icon array, and therefore displaying denominator information, reduces denominator neglect, increasing comprehension of relative risk (Garcia-Retamero and Galesic, 2010). Icon arrays displaying both types of outcome are particularly helpful for understanding datasets with unequal denominators, and for individuals with high graph literacy (Okan et al., 2012). However, these effects are largest when depicting small probabilities (Okan et al. 2020). 

Stacked bar charts function similarly to icon arrays: lower bars represent the focal outcome, upper bar represent the alternative outcome, and their combination represents the denominator. Like icon arrays, stacked bar charts lessen the influence of denominator neglect (Stone et al., 2003). However, denominator information can be displayed in bar charts without using additional stacked bars to represent alternative outcomes. Extending an axis to incorporate the denominator value also communicates relevant numerical context. In this case, the blank space between the bars for focal outcomes and the upper axis limit corresponds to the alternative outcomes. Research has denonstrated that bar charts representing alternative outcomes with blank space increase perceptions of risk likelihood compared to those representing alternative outcomes with stacked bars (Stone et al., 2017). This research did not examine how presenting *denominator information* influences interpretation, since identical axis limits were employed across conditions.

Directly manipulating bar charts’ upper axis limits provides insight into use of this source of denominator information. Bar charts with axes which extended to the denominator value produces more accurate estimates of changes in risk (Garcia-Retamero and Galesic, 2010). This design also elicits decreased ratings of risk perception (Okan et al., 2018). In both studies, accompanying text included the denominator value. These studies demonstrate that extending axes to incorporate denominator values influences interpretation of risk. However, they do not provide specific evidence on how interpretations of *plotted values’ magnitudes* are affected. Garcia-Retamero and Galesic (2010) measured risk understanding: how faithfully participants represented the exact numbers displayed. Only assessing comprehension fails to capture individuals’ *impressions* of plotted information (Feldman-Stewart et al., 2007). Understanding the ‘gist’ obtained from a visualisation is crucial since this takes precedence over ‘verbatim’ information when making decisions (Reyna, 2008). Reyna (2008) argues that assessing gist requires consideration of how plotted values’ magnitudes are interpreted, since plotted values’ relative differences are only one aspect of a dataset conveyed by a visualisation. Indeed, Okan et al. (2018) collected magnitude ratings, yet these cannot be examined in isolation, since they were assimilated into a combined measure of perceived risk, along with ratings of the degree of *difference between* plotted values. Outside the risk communication literature, a substantial body of research has demonstrated that judgements of the difference between values change as a function of axis range (Pandey, Correll, Witt, Yang). In spite of this, research has neglected the effects of axis range on judgements of the magnitude of *the values themselves*. This is the focus of experiments in this work.

Various accounts have sought to explain the consequences of including denominator information in visualisations. Depicting denominators may facilitate understanding of part-to-whole relationships, diminishing class-inclusion errors associated with denominator neglect (Reyna, 2008). This argument is consistent with Fuzzy Trace Theory, which also predicts the influence of physical attributes in gist representations, such that the appearance of short bars in charts with extended axes may contribute to smaller magnitude judgements (Reyna, 2008). Additionally, Stone et al. (2018) suggest facilitation of proportional reasoning may be largely responsible for observed effects. Increasing the salience of the denominator in text fails to affect judgements, yet a graphical representation effectively communicates the true scale of the denominator, helping put numerators into perspective. 

Prior work on extending axes, discussed above, did not disclose methods for determining axis limits in charts without denominators. The values used as upper limits appear to be arbitrary. In the present study, we increase ecological validity by employing default axis limits from ggplot2, a popular visualisation tool. Furthermore, previous studies’ statistical power and generalisability have been limited by the use of one (Okan et al. 2018) or two (Garcia-Retamero and Galesic, 2010) trials per participant. Our experiments explore a range of scenarios (32 experimental trials per participant). The data presented are also unrelated to risk judgements, the domain of this prior work.
